the World Health Organization says it is
extremely worried about a potential
polio outbreak in Gaza it warned that
traces of the irus have been detected in
the territory's Wastewater and that the
dire situ sanitation situation could
allow it to spread quickly polio attacks
the central nervous system causing
paralysis and death in extreme cases the
wh says a mass vaccination campaign may
be
needed Let's cross over now to Joe
English who is with the United Nations
Children's agency UNICEF so help us
understand this what exactly would a
serious polio outbreak mean for the
children in
Gaza with you this is something that
we've been warning about for many many
months the threat of of communicable and
waterborne diseases and sad to say that
we continue to see our worst fears come
true now thankfully this is just traces
at the moment we have not seen any
paralytic cases in children but that
does not mean that that cannot happen
and so we are scrambling with our
colleagues at Who and the health
authorities to do everything that we can
to prevent children because I mean your
viewers can see the pictures you know
this is Rife conditions for waterborne
diseases and so we need to be able to
get in and vaccinate children on a mass
scale but the only way that we're going
to be able to do that is with an end to
the fighting it will be near impossible
to do whilst the bombs continue to fall
fighting continues you know these are
just no conditions for children to live
in
Period so what has been done currently
to help limit the spread of the virus in
Gazo so we've already begun a risk
analysis and we're also working with the
local communities to make sure that they
are aware of the risk and know how to
prevent it but the reality is is that we
can give people that advice but when you
have 600 people in some cases in Gaza
sharing a single toilet you know there
is a very different very there's a huge
difference between between knowing the
risks understanding the risks and still
being able to prepare yourself and
prevent the spread and so ultimately as
I say we need to be able to get in we
need to be able to provide children
families with safe drinking water with
adequate sanitation you know it's a sad
reality that portable toilets are one of
the supplies that we've had issues
getting into the Gaza Strip you know and
so we've said this again and again but
it Bears repeating the only way that we
will be able to get in with the scale of
humanitarian support that is needed to
prevent these kind of outbreaks and to
address the huge needs of the population
is a ceas fire is a release of the
hostages and it's an end to these
absolute
Horrors now help us understand this as
well how big of a setback is this for
the worldwide campaign to eradicate
polio is this something that we expect
to stay in Gaza or could this spread
further yeah polio does not respect
borders you know I think that is
incredibly important to say say the sad
reality is is that a couple of years ago
Gaza had 99% coverage for polio
vaccinations so this wouldn't have been
an issue and and it has to be said that
it is not just those unsanitary
conditions and the the terrible
conditions that many people are living
in but it's also the fact that the
vaccination polio vaccination in
children has fallen from 99% in 2022 to
89% in 2023 so that means there are
potentially thousands of young children
who are vulnerable and that's not just
going to be in Gaza that is also going
to be in Israel that is also going to be
in the West Bank and that is also going
to potentially affect the wider region
so the quicker that we can get in and
protect children by ensuring that
they're getting their vaccines and not
just vaccines against against polio but
against all of these childhood diseases
the better we can prepare the entire
region all of these vulnerable children
against these kind of outbreaks it's
really a tragic situation that was Joe
English from UNICEF thank you very much
for joining
us thanks so much